Queen Lion is looking to make the elections in her animal kingdom more fair.
Currently, she divides her citizens into ranges, each of which selects one representative to
go to the Jungle Council, which makes laws for the kingdom.
But her citizens are unhappy, and it's easy to see why.
The council is full of monkeys.
Of course, some of her citizens are monkeys, but not all of them.
This council doesn't fairly represent her kingdom.
Queen Lion visits one of the ranges to find out what's wrong and how to fix it.
In this range, there are five monkeys, four tigers, three owls, two lynx, and one buffalo.
One of each runs for representative, and all citizens vote for their own species.
The election rule is that the candidate with the most votes wins, which is the monkey.
But it's a pretty unsatisfying result considering that two-thirds of the citizens in this range
aren't monkeys and wouldn't vote for monkeys.
This is the same across all the ranges of the kingdom.
The monkeys always happen to have more votes than anybody else, so they win all the elections
even though they're a minority of the total population.
Closer inspection reveals that the independent advisors hired to draw the range boundaries
in the first place weren't as independent as they might have appeared.
The result is unhappy citizens who don't trust the Jungle Council to make the fairest laws
for all, quite rightly.
Now Queen Lion wants to maximize the number of citizens happy with the election results.
One way to do that is to abolish the ranges and use a proportional system.
But her citizens want local representatives.
So Queen Lion needs a system that both makes her citizens happier by having a more representative
council while keeping the local elections in place.
After doing a little research, she finds out how.
Single transferable vote.
The big change with STV is that ranges send more than one representative, which may seem
weird, but Queen Lion decides to test it out.
She takes three ranges which used to each send one representative and combines them
into one bigger range that will send three.
On election day, citizens go to the polls and the results in this new range are just
the same as they were in the old ranges.
So nothing seems better, but with STV to figure out the winners, take the total votes and
divide them by the number of representatives needed, in this case three, which gives 33%
as the amount a candidate needs to win.
So all three candidates go to the council, which accurately represents the citizens in
the range.
Whereas under the old system, each individual range would have sent a monkey, leaving two
thirds of the citizens without representation.
A bigger range with multiple winners allows the results to be more proportional.
This test turned out well, but it was also as simple as could be.
Now Queen Lion wants to see what happens in a race where not everybody is a winner.
The next big range she tests has five candidates running for office.
Gorilla, Tarsier, Monkey, Tiger, and Lynx, three of which can be representatives.
Election day comes and goes and here are the results of the citizens' first choices.
Tarsier gets 5%, Gorilla gets 28%, Monkey gets 33%, Tiger gets 21%, and Lynx gets 13%.
As before, a candidate needs 33% to win.
Monkey has that and so is immediately selected as one of the three representatives.
But no one else reached the winning 33%, so how are the other two representatives selected?
Step one, get rid of the biggest loser.
Sorry Tarsier, you really had no chance at all.
When the citizens voted, they could have just put an X next to the candidate they liked
best.
But with STV, they can also rank their favorite candidates.
This is important because it shows how the election would have turned out if one of the
candidates hadn't run.
Tiny and worried Tarsiers would have voted for the big calm Gorilla without Tarsier in
the race.
So if their candidate can't win, they want their votes to go to the Gorilla instead.
This pushes Gorilla up to 33% and he becomes the next representative.
Ranking allows citizens to support their favorite candidate without worrying.
There's no point in strategizing about how everyone else is going to vote.
The system works to maximize voter happiness with the result.
Now back to the range.
There's still one representative to select, so the next biggest loser is Lynx.
His voters don't like Simeon's, but they do think Tiger's interests are similar to theirs
and so if Lynx can't win, they want Tiger to get their votes.
He reaches 33% and becomes the third and final representative.
The election results look pretty good, especially considering the citizens' first and second
choices.
Citizens also have a local representative they can feel comfortable approaching, whereas
using the old system, everybody gets a monkey.
Lastly, Queenline wants to know what happens in a range with just two political parties.
Under the most votes win system, multiple candidates from the same party would be a
disaster.
They'd split their voters and hand the win to their opposition.
Queenline makes one last test range with two thirds Tiger's and one third Gorilla's that,
as before, needs three representatives.
Because citizens rank their candidates under STV, there can be more than one candidate
from the same party running at the same time without any problems.
The Tiger's run two candidates, as do the Gorilla's.
On election day, White Tiger gets a massive amount of first choice votes, probably because
he's so cool.
Meanwhile, the Gorilla's are split between their new guy and the old silverback.
White Tiger is selected as the first representative, but what happens next?
While Tiger is the biggest loser and it seems like he should be eliminated, it's also obvious
that he would have gotten way more votes if White Tiger wasn't in the race.
If a candidate has more votes than they need, like White Tiger does, the first step is to
give the extra votes to their second choice.
This gets Tiger to 33% and he becomes the next representative.
If that seems strange, there are two things to consider.
If instead the extra votes were ignored and Tiger eliminated, then the Gorilla's would
get the remaining two wins, which would obviously not be representing the range very well.
And ignoring extra votes punishes citizens who back popular candidates, which gets us
back to the problem where voters start thinking about how everyone else will vote rather than
what they really want.
If a candidate is able to get more votes than they really need, then it also means those
who support him are a big section of the population and thus fairly should get more representation.
Right.
After the extra votes go to Tiger, the election finishes as before.
Silverback came in last, is eliminated and his voters' second choice is the younger candidate,
so Gorilla gets in.
And the results look fair.
Greenline has seen STV work.
Whether a range has one party or lots of parties, the process is still always the same.
First, citizens rank their favorite candidates.
Second, any candidate above the threshold wins immediately.
Extra votes then go to their next choice.
If there's no winner, the last place is eliminated and the votes go to their next choice.
Repeat until all the winners are found.
This whole process is designed to maximize the number of citizens who are happy with
the results.
And it gives STV many advantages over the old most-votes-wins system.
Citizens can honestly vote for their favorite candidate without worrying about what everyone
else is going to do.
It's more proportional, so monkeying with the borders matters less.
And almost all citizens will have a local representative they actually voted for.
In the end, Queenline decides to switch the council's elections to single transferable
vote to make a better jungle council for all.